docs/why conventional commits decision post (#53)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-conventional-commits.qmd

---
title: "Why conventional commits (with optional emojis)"

> description: "Our reasons for using conventional commits (with optional emojis following the Gitmoji convention) across the Seedcase projects."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Our reasons for using conventional commits (with optional emojis following the Gitmoji convention) across Seedcase projects."
```

date: "2024-05-14"

> categories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories:
- git
- commit messages
- communication
- collaboration
- teamwork
- workflow
```

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a
statement in the form of a question for the problem.
:::

There are many ways to write commit messages, but having a consistent
and standardised convention to follow can streamline the project history
and make it easier to keep track of changes, as well as improve the
speed and efficacy of the review process. It can also support coherence
and consistency across contributions, which is especially important when
working in a team-based and open source setting.

::: callout-caution
Note that the benefits described above are tightly coupled to a clear,
consistent workflow on commit frequency and content (see the decision
post on why we aim to make [atomic commits and
PRs](why-atomic-commits.qmd)).
:::

Since commit message conventions are not enforced by Git itself, but
rather by the team working on a given project, the question becomes:

> Which commit message convention should we follow when we write commit
> messages in Seedcase projects?

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things
have arisen that impact work.
:::

> In the Seedcase projects, we emphasise the open-science philosophies of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Seedcase projects, we emphasise the open-source philosophies of
```

    "Add feature" instead of "Added feature")
-   Use the title to summarise the changes made in the commit.
-   Use a potential body to provide context and justifications for the
    change (such as elaboration on the changes, breaking changes,
    reference of issues, and tagging relevant people).
:::

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits
and drawbacks for each option.
:::

There seem to be many general recommendations for best practices and
fewer established conventions for how commit messages should be written.
We will consider the conventions Conventional Commits and Gitmoji in the
following sections.

### Conventional commits

The [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)
convention builds on the [Angular
convention](https://github.com/angular/angular/blob/22b96b9/CONTRIBUTING.md#-commit-message-guidelines),
but was generalised to go beyond Typescript. It's widely adopted due to
its compatibility with semantic versioning and automated release
processes. Moreover, it's commonly used in various software development

> communities, including the open science communities. Its structured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communities, including the open source communities. Its structured
```

Open source, not science right? Commit message conventions are not well used within open science unfortunately... Version control isn't as common either!

Author: Ah, yes! Thanks for the catch!

format aligns well with the organized and systematic approach favoured

> in open-science projects. Additionally, its is compatible with automated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in open-source projects. It is also compatible with automated
```

[optional footer(s)]
```

The header includes a **type**, an optional **scope**, and a
**description** of the change. The **type** is a mandatory field that
specifies the kind of change that the commit is providing (like `feat`,
`fix`, `refactor`, `doc`, and `chore`). The **scope** is an optional
field that specifies the part of the codebase that the commit is
affecting. The **description** is a mandatory field that provides a
concise summary of the change.

The optional **body** provides a longer description of the change,
including the motivation of why the changes was implemented and how it
contrasts with previous implementations. The optional **footer**
contains metadata about the change, such as potential breaking changes
and references to relevant issues.

The conventional commits convention is also supported by a [VS Code
extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vivaxy.vscode-conventional-commits)
that eases the process of writing commit messages in the correct format.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Provides a clear structure for commit messages.
-   Has an easy-to-use VS Code extension.
-   Can be used to generate changelogs.

> -   Widespread adoption in various software development and open science

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Widespread adoption in various software development and open source
```

    extension eases the process substantially).
-   No use of emojis which can make commit messages more visually
    appealing and easier to scan for intention and purpose.
:::
:::

### The Gitmoji convention

The [Gitmoji](https://gitmoji.dev/) commit message convention
incorporates emojis to categorise commit messages. It's an initiative to
standardise the use of emojis in GitHub commit messages and it offers
explanations of the meaning of each emoji. Each commit message consists
of an **intention** (an emoji), an optional **scope**, and a
**message**, like shown below:

```         
<intention>(<scope>): <message>
```

Examples of intentions include `:sparkles:` for new features, `:bug:`
for bug fixes, `:recycle:` for refactoring, and `:memo:` for
documentation changes. The use of emojis can make commit messages more
visually appealing and easier to scan, especially for those who are more
visually oriented.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Provides a clear structure for commit messages.
-   Has an easy-to-use VS Code extension.
-   The use of emojis can make commit messages more visually appealing
    and easier to scan to identify the purpose or intention.

> -   Gitmoji is an open-source project which fits well with the open

Author: ```suggestion
-   Gitmoji is an open-source project which fits well with the open-source
```

>     science philosophy of the Seedcase projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    source philosophy of the Seedcase Project.
```

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   For those not familiar with emojis or who are less visually
    oriented, it might be harder to understand the meaning of the
    commit.
-   No structured format for the body or footer of the commit message to
    provide more context.
:::
:::

## Decision outcome

::: content-hidden
What decision was made, use the form "We decided on CHOICE because of
REASONS."
:::

> When deciding which commit message convention to follow in the Seedcase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When deciding which commit message convention to follow in all Seedcase
```

---
title: "Why conventional commits (with optional emojis)"
description: "Our reasons for using conventional commits (with optional emojis following the Gitmoji convention) across Seedcase projects."
date: "2024-05-14"
categories:
- git
- commit messages
- communication
- collaboration
- teamwork
- workflow

> - git
> - commit messages
> - communication
> - collaboration
> - teamwork
> - workflow

Author: ```suggestion
```

motivation of why the changes was implemented and how it contrasts with
previous implementations), and the footer includes **metadata** about
the change (including potential breaking changes and references to
relevant issues). In the header, the scope is optional, and both the
body and footer are optional.

This convention originated from the
[Angular](https://github.com/angular/angular/tree/main) project, which
is built on TypeScript. It defines specific types for commits, such as
`feat`, `fix`, `docs`, `style`, `refactor`, `test`, and more, helping to
categorize changes effectively. In addition, the angular convention
encourages the use of scope, which should be the name of the npm package
affected (which is JavaScript-specific) or anything specifying where in
the codebase the commit change is made.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Provides a clear structure for commit messages.
-   Can be used to generate changelogs (including the omission of
    irrelevant commits, like formatting).
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   It can be too verbose for some projects.
-   Usage more prevalent in Angular-related projects.
-   Developed in a Typescript context

> -   No emojis which can make commit messages easier to scan and more

Reviewer 2: It isn't completely clear to me if the emojis makes it easier or more difficult to scan the message :-)

Author: I have slightly rewritten this. I hope that it's clearer now :)

    visually appealing.
:::
:::

### Conventional commits

Conventional commits are inspired by the Angular convention described

> above, but is more lightweight (how?). This convention also provides a

Reviewer 2: Did you mean to leave the (how?) in here?

Author: Haha, nope!

Author: Thanks for the catch. I have removed it ;)
